# 2024-08-20

## Outline
- Syllabus review
    - Description and goals
    - requirements
        - reading questions
        - aquinas paper
    - policies, texts and schedule
- what is theology
    - some initial definitions
    - ultimate purpose/goal 
    - challenge and reward


Thank God he thinks seminaries make annoying little Thomists

#### Syllabus
Read the reading question before doing the reading-- context and aim

Reading questions come in email 

"Several sentences of reflective engagement"

Critical exposition renders judgment about the texts-- includes a  why
- making further judgments; getting into the head of the author? Not our
judgment of the text, but what of the author thinks?
- makes connections about what is unstated 

Summary restates what someone does;

find spreadsheet generator for class schedule and assignments



### what is theology
- some initial definitions
- ultimate purpose/goal 
- challenge and reward

We're going to do theology and reflect on what we're doing while reflecting on
theology.

#### initial definitions

Etymological:
- theology comes from "theos" + "logos" -> words /reasoning/study conceding God
- So, the focus of theology is God, or things in relation to God
This gives us a what

Anselm:
- "fides querens intellectum" -> "faith seeking understanding"
This gives us a how
The starting point is always faith.

All of this holds together, form what to how

Thus theology is properly an intellectual discipline which starts from faith
later, we move from faith to revelation

Trent provides us an illustration of the discipline of christian doctrine

Why? Look to Trent's talk of "aims"
- integration
- pursuit of virtue
- how to attain God as our end
- "every concern of this teaching and instruction must be directed to the
charity that 'never ends'" --- CCT,  Preface, no. 10

Combined definition:
- Reasoned study about God (and things in relation to God), on the basis of
faith, for the purpose of coming to a greater understanding to these things, and
in turn, a greater love

You do not love what you do not know, so we must spend time with theology

Example-- finding of Jesus in the temple
- The Holy Family seek accompanied by a finding.
- "Your father and I have been looking for you anxiously" -- a anguished
searching for Truth, not simply curiosity . A pursuit of a believed one who
seems to be missing.
"If Christ is really to be found, he needs to be sought. A seeking that flows
from a longing."
- What does Mary do after the seeking and finding are done? Abiding with our
Lord, but more specifically, "keeping these things in her heart" --  a
contemplation of the intellectual labor, which is to be integrated with the
other dimensions of formation


The church witnesses to and proclaims more than she can explain

















