---
id: rft/2024-11-06
aliases: 
tags: 
cssclasses: []
---

# 
## 2024-11-05

### Outline
Handing on divine revelation
- What is handed on? How?
- Distinguishing tradition, scripture, and the Magisterium
- Role(s) of the Holy Spirit

Preservation and Development
- Unfolding vs unfolding 
- Development vs.corruption

Magisterial service to God's word
- Teaching authority in itself
- Ordinary vs. extraordinary
- The charism of infallibility

Various "grades of assent"

----------


> [!takeaway]
> The Church is given by God to proclaim, live, and celebrate more than she can
> explain
> - true
> - living and live-giving
> - mysteries

### Handing on divine revelation
#### What is handed on? How? From Dei Verbum Ch. 2
By his authority, Christ hands on 
- words
- deeds
- institutions 

to the apostles; the light and life of Christ himself. These are then handed
down by the apostles by their
- preaching
- example
- observances

to the Church, which in turn hands on to the faithful by its
- Teaching
- life
- worship

#### Distinguishing tradition, scripture, and the Magisterium
> [!def] Sacred Scripture
> What the apostles have written down regarding divine revelation

> [!def] Sacred tradition 
> What the apostles have passed down, but not in practice rather than writing

> [!def] Magisterium
> The teaching authority given to the Apostles, passed down to the bishops

"Three legged stool" -- you cannot remove any of these, lest the stool topple
- However, this gives the impression that all three are of the same weight
- Neither scripture nor tradition are in service to the Magisterium, it is the
other way around

#### Role(s) of the Holy Spirit
The Holy Spirit is involved in:
- Magisterial teaching
- transformation of hearts in seeking to receive the life of Christ
- moving in grace
- This is uniform and an unity with the teaching of Christ and the Apostles

> [!question] Does revelation cease to be life-giving if it is written down?
> The words alone do not have an efficacy in themselves; the correct reading of
> scripture draws one into the life of the Church.

### Preservation and Development
> [!reference] handout on development of doctrine

#### Unfolding vs unfolding 
> 1. Unfolding within scripture, by means of further divine revelation
>     - movement from the old to the new
>     - it is the same truth
> 2. Growth in perception, done in three ways
>     1. Study
>     2. Experience
>     3. Episcopal preaching

1. Thomistic, That which God discloses. Involves God doing stuff and unfolding
   truth
2. analogous, regarding the state of the Church; revelation
    unfolding in the Church; or the one in whom this takes place

> [!quote] St. Vincent of Lérins
> In the Catholic Church, all care must be taken so we hold that which has been
> believed everywhere, always, and by everyone.
> > "*ubique, semper, et ab omnibus*"

#### Development vs. corruption

### Magisterial service to God's word
> [!question] What is the role of the Church's teaching?
> It is a teaching authority in service to God's Word

#### Teaching authority in itself
The Divine Commission flows from the authority of Christ, which he gives to the
apostles in the commission.

Biblical foundations

Nature of the authority, as authority
- There is a tendency to identify the Magisterium as "people"; which is kind of
true. It is more of a responsibility and an authority possessed by people.

Scope
- This is both Sacred Scripture and Sacred Tradition
- Divine Revelation, especially as regards faith and morals
    - Serve (teaching only what has been handed on)
    - listen (must be learners of this in the first place)
    - guard
    - explain

#### Ordinary vs. extraordinary
> [!question] What is the distinction between ordinary and extraordinary Magisterium, if they are not people?
> It is the way in which the teaching authority is exercised; things done by
> those who possess the teaching authority.

| Ordinary                                                                                     | Extraordinary                                                                               |
| -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Merely authentic                                                                             | "solemn"                                                                                    |
| Pope, when not speaking ex Cathedra<br>Bishops, individually or in council when not defining | Pope, when speaking ex Cathedra or by a definitive act<br>Bishops, in council when defining |



#### The charism of infallibility
> [!reference] Handout on the infallibility of the Magisterium

> [!def] Infallibility
> The privilege by which the Magisterium of the Church, through the assistance
> of the Holy Spirit, is preserved immune from error when it defines or
> definitively proposes a doctrine of faith or morals.

- Not documents, as such
- Rather, statements or propositions

### Three "grades of assent"















