---
id: rft/2024-10-15
aliases: []
tags: []
---

# 2024-10-15

### Outline
The object of Faith
    Formal aspect and material object
    Additional formal characteristics 
        Truth and certitude and unseenness
    Fitting necessity of words
        Role of propositions
        Words and things
        Explicit vs implicit belief
            Distinction re: belief
            Distinction among believers


### aspects of belief
> From last time
1. Credere Deum
    - believing about/material object
2. Credere Deo
    - believing whom/formal aspect
3. Credere in Deum
    - believing unto union with God/"final aspect"

Faith is Both an act of the intellect and the will, moving the intellect to give
assent to trust in the one who discloses the love of one who reveals


### The object of Faith

#### Formal aspect and material object

   # Additional formal characteristics 
Truth and certitude and unseenness

Thomas is talking about something much stronger than mere opinion, of which he
would consider some of the "beliefs" that we have about other things and hold
to-- ex, January 6 lmao 

"unseenness" -- another contrast of believing with opining 
opining -- giving an opinion, or having the opinion

We regard matters of faith as those which God has revealed, as something we have
"seen"
Credibility -- seeing that a thing should be believed XXX 

Steve cannot have demonstrative knowledge of God's existence and also believe
in it. That is a contradiction. He cannot believe and not believe.

#### Fitting necessity of words
> "In being believed, he is unseen"

The complexity of our knowing lends itself to the use of complex language, even
if what is True is simple

We grasp the whole on the basis of the parts-- we can see the whole tree, but to
understand completely we need to abstract the parts, such as the trunk from the
limbs from the twigs from the leaves. 

The thing known is in the knower according to the mode of the knower.

Role of propositions:
The act of belief does not terminate in a belief, but in a thing
The creed is more than just a compilation of words-- they are a collection so as
to help move the mind to assent to the immaterial things believed. This is
inescapable from the thing heard and from words, since we need to use those to
asset to the thing.


Words and things

Explicit vs implicit belief:
- Explicit belief is enunciable, and verbalized as such. That is, you can put
into words and IS put in words
- Implicit belief would be under-verbalized
    - formally implicit: readiness to believe what is taught
    - materially implicit: readiness **and** embrace of material object

You cannot be a believer and have nothing to say about what you believe. Some
verbalization has to be present. 

The short answer is yes, man is required to believe something about God
explicitly.

Proper material object of faith-- that where man is made x of the Blessed

---

article 9 -- symbol == creed

---

Creeds articulate what is to be believed, while also clarifying thing the
language of things already believed

There is a wise order to the things which must be believed -- it is not an
amorphous blob. This is what we mean by articulations-- first the shoulder
forms, then the arm, then the hand, then the fingers

The confession of any of these 14 major articles relate to the confession of all
of the other articles, pointing towards heaven

Articles: properly and *per se* of faith 
secondary truths: of faith *per accidens*. These are reveaed for the purpose of
    manifesting article
Preambles: things which are naturally knowable and presupposed to the articles,
    revealed because otherwise known only to a few after a long time with an
    admixture of error











