---
id: rft/2024-09-20
aliases: []
tags: []
---

# 2024-09-20

### Outline
Human teaching of divine things
- why consider grace and prophecy
- contextualizing the ST texts
- gratuitous grace (aka "charisms")
    - distinction from sanctifying
    - Aquinas' ordering in ST II-II
- Aquinas on prophecy
    - what is(n't) he up to?
    - broader compass 
    - proper definition
    - "prophetic instinct"
    - "ingredients" and exercise

#### Last time:
- man's capacity for learning divine things in general

#### currently: 
- man's capacity for learning divine things so as to teach others (prophecy)

#### going forward
- man's capacity for learning divine things so as to cling or adhere to them
(faith)

#### Grace
- Grace is the underlying divine gift that enables what faith justifies
and serves as the framework for the HS' role in everything to do with divine
revelation
- 1 cor 12 -- charity accompanies grace
- grace can be either a habit or a form

> habit: quality of the soul that pertains either to its being or action

#### sanctifying grace vs habitual grace
1. sanctifying == habitual grace (faith)
2. gratuitous  == charism; freely given (prophecy)
    - Isn't all grace gratuitous? Yes. Only some sanctifies. 

> On toxic charism culture:
> "I have a charism of withering sarcasm" 

Charisms are always on a freely given grace from the Spirit

#### Division of gratuitous graces
All are directed towards teaching another person divine things:
1. Knowledge
    - prophecy
        - faith
        - discernment
        - interpretation of speeches
        - words of
            - 'wisdom'
            - 'Knowledge'
2. Speech
    - tongues
    - words of
        - 'wisdom'
        - 'Knowledge'
3. Confirmation
    - miracles
        - healing

#### Prophecy
Who is in view?
- prophets in sacred scripture
    - proper
- human authors of scripture
    - proper
- Persons entrusted with teaching (or governance)
    - bishops
    - priests
    - teachers
    - the Christian faithful
    - These are all under the category of prophetic instinct
        - using God's help without knowing you have God's help
- contemporary visionaries/prophets?
    - not really

> "STEVE! No more anime pornography!"

in the scheme of gratuitous graces, everything is connected to prophecy, but
prophecy is still more and distinct 
- most linked with Knowledge

Since "prophecy" is linked to all of it, prophecy is whatever God needs to give
to someone in order to bring someone to Him.

Definition of prophecy Proper : 
-A divine inspiration or revelation^1 announcing the outcome of things^2 with
unchangeable truth.^3
- from Casiadorus 
1. Q171.1ad4;a2
2. Q171.3c,obj.1/ad1
2. Q173.4; 171.5,6

























