---
id: rft/2024-10-01
aliases: []
tags: []
---

### Outline
Context, background to ST ss
- Human nature, powers
- passions, habits, and virtues

Why theological virtues?
- nature and beatitude
- distinction of virtues
- qualified priority of faith

Rootedness in sanctifying grace

Making sense of Paul in Romans
- Context of Ch. 4-5
- grace and the virtues
- the beginning of eternal life

### Partakers of divine nature
#### Context, background to ST ss
Human nature, powers
- cf. Handout (once you bloody find it)

Passions, habits, and virtues

##### Considersations in the summa:

| ST I |  | ST I-II |  |
| --------------- | --------------- | --------------- | --------------- |
| Procession of creatures from God | qq. 44 ff. | man's last end | qq. 1-5 |
| human nature | qq. 75-76 | human acts | qq. 6-21 |
| powers of soul | qq. 77-83 | human passions | qq. 22-48 |
| intellectual powers | qq. 84-89 | human habits | qq. 49-54 |
| vegetative powers | qq. 97-98, 118-119 | virtues | qq. 55-70 |
| | | vices | qq. 71-89 |

Habit == firm and stable disposition to act in a given manner
As habits, all virtues are perfections of the soul


#### Why theological virtues?
> Answered across the various articles of q. 62.

Nature and beatitude
- man is perfected by virtue, whereby he is directed towards happiness (beatitude)
- God is the end of the virtues, and the theological virtues are ordered
especially towards knowledge which man cannot obtain on his own
- geared towards needing a second nature to know these things
- not only can we share in God's nature, but we must, since God is the true end
of the rational creature
- When man exceeds what he is capable by his human nature, he begins to partake
in the divine nature (?)

> Such like principles are called “theological virtues”: first, because their
> object is God, inasmuch as they direct us aright to God: secondly, because
> they are infused in us by God alone: thirdly, because these virtues are not
> made known to us, save by Divine revelation, contained in Holy Writ. 

The theological virtues perfect the nature of man (or something)

Distinction of virtues
- Yep, they're different

Qualified priority of faith
- There is an ordering of perfection
- in the order of generation, faith precedes hope and hope precedes charity
- In the order of perfection, charity precedes faith and hope


#### the theological virtues are rooted in sanctifying grace
> yep, they sure are

Thomas differentiates grace from virtue-- grace is not a virtue

Grace is the principle and root of the theological virtues; so it is kind of
like nature, but not the same as nature

#### Making sense of Paul in Romans
Context of Ch. 4-5
- addressing the place of the law and the works of the law, especially
circumcision 
- ch. 4 directed towards the first person said to be justified by God

Paul's bigger point -- righteousness is most properly a divine gift

Grace and the virtues

The beginning of eternal life
- Romans 5, life bestowed by Christ by the justification of Christ (or something
like that)

Faith underlies the fluttering of eternal life? lmao ok


















