---
id: rft/2024-11-19
aliases: []
tags: []
cssclasses: []
---

# New Testament Witness to Christ (DV ch. 5)
## 2024-11-19

### Outline
What is Proclaimed
- The kingdom
- Jesus Himself
- The mystery of God

Gospels as Principal Witnesses
- Apostolicity
    - Claim and its status
    - external evidence
- Historicity
    - Claim and its status
    - Stages of development
    - Authoral discretion
- How (not) to address with others?


----------

> [!takeaway]

### What is Proclaimed
These are things necessarily kept in view for what *Dei Verbum* is talking about

#### The kingdom
> [!question] What is the proclamation of the kingdom?
> In a movement from most apparent to least:
> 1. The King -- Jesus Christ, the Incarnate Word
> 2. His victory -- Christ's saving work (passion death, resurrection, ascension)
> 2. His reign and its extension -- The application of this saving work to others (what belongs to the Church)
> 	- sacraments
> 	- moral life (grace, virtues, acts, etc.)
> 	- glory

"What we enter into"

#### Jesus Himself
> [!question] What does the proclamation of Jesus himself entail?
> In a movement from least mysterious to most mysterious:
> 1. Jesus is truly and fully human
> 	> Opposed: Docistism
> 	- He was born. He was raised by parents. He probably skinned his knee.
> 2. Jesus is the promised savior
> 	> Opposed: Marcianism
> 	- Seed born of a woman that puts an end to sin and death
> 	- Born of Abraham
> 	- Prophet like Moses
> 	- Raised up after David with eternal reign
> 3. Jesus is truly and fully divine
> 	> Opposed: Aryanism
> 	- Prophecies which indicate God as savior and the future promised savior (eg. Ez. 34)
> 4. Jesus is personally distinct as Son/Word
> 	> Opposed: Nestorianism?

"He who comes to us"

#### The Mystery of God
> [!question] What is the Mystery of God?
> God is not a solitude, but a perfect communion of infinite love. What we have before us are:
> - Visible missions/sendings of Son and Spirit revealing their eternal processions
> - Invisible missions/sendings which we enter into the visible missions (?)
> What it means to be sent, ref. "Jesus is 4"
> Helps us to give an account of the King, in turn to give an account of the proclamation of the kingdom

### Gospels as Principal Witnesses

#### Apostolicity
> [!question] Are the Gospels of Apostolic origin?
> "The Church has always and everywhere held and continues to hold that the four Gospels are of apostolic origin. For what the Apostles preached in fulfillment of the commission of Christ, afterwards they themselves and apostolic men, under the inspiration of the divine Spirit, handed on to us in writing: the foundation of faith, namely, the fourfold Gospel, according to Matthew, Mark, Luke and John." (*Dei Verbum* 18)

##### Claim and its status
*Dei Verbum's* claim is that the Apostles or those with direct relation wrote this Gospels. This is deliberately claimed without reference to any external evidence, elaborating the teaching of the ordinary magisterium of the Church, having been received by Christ and continually taught. It does not pretend to proclaim this truth for the first time, bur rather says it has been true always.
- The Church holds this view, and not holding this view is distinctly non-Catholic. 

##### External Evidence
1. Ancient testimony from the Fathers and other writers
2. Ecclesial canon lists
3. Lack of discrepancies in titles or ancient authorship claims
	- Hebrews is anonymous in this sense, though, because sometimes they circulate as Paul or an associate, but they disagree.
	- The point is that the fragmented evidence for the anonymity of the Gospels is entirely lacking
4. Continued use in the liturgy, ancient and contemporary

#### Historicity
> [!question] Are the things that these guys said actually historically true?
> "Holy Mother Church has firmly and with absolute constancy held, and continues to hold, that the four Gospels just named, whose historical character the Church unhesitatingly asserts, faithfully hand on what Jesus Christ, while living among men, really did and taught for their eternal salvation until the day He was taken up into heaven (see Acts 1:1)." (*Dei Verbum* 19)

##### Claim and its status
*Dei Verbum's* claim is that the things in the Gospels really did happen and it has been faithfully handed on. In the same vein as the previous claim, this is stated in line with the transmission of Tradition as something that was taught from the beginning of the Church.

It would be a mistake to take the historical accounts as simply newspaper or journal articles.

##### Stages of development
Three implicit stages of development in *Dei Verbum*, illuminated in *Sancta Mater Ecclesia*:
1. Public ministry of Christ
2. Apostolic preaching
3. Redaction/publication in writing of select elements

This is both the activity of the Holy Spirit and human activity on part of the writers.

##### Authorial discretion
The authors were able to decided what they wanted to tell us, but contained in what they wrote was the full truth of Jesus.

There remains a "theological bent" to these works; they are first and foremost a proclamation of Christ and who he is; but precisely because it is rooted in this, it means necessarily that it transmits what has been done.

#### How (not) to address with others?
> [!book] Book Recommendation
> Augustine, *On the Harmony of the Gospels* 
> *De Consensu Evangelistarum*










