---
id: rft/2024-09-17
aliases: []
tags: []
---

# 2024-09-17

### Outline
Contextualizing ST I, q 12
What's at stake?
- God as man's beatitude
- Distinction of states and possibility of exceptions
Knowledge of God in this life
- by natural reason
- by grace
Additional considerations from I-II q 109
- God's role in human knowing
- Additional "lights"


### Review of structure of the argument for sacred doctrine
Sacred doctrine consider three things:
1. What God knows and shares with the blessed
2. What God teaches and reveals
3. What Sacred theology studies

### Contextualizing ST I, q 12
Handout-- prologues to questions 2 and 3

### What's at stake?
Why is Thomas making this inquiry?

#### God as man's beatitude
Thomas asserts that God is man's beatitude (his happiness, his blessedness)

This corresponds with what we read in q. 1

It does not matter if we are talking about man or angels, since they are both
created intellects.

There is a impossibility of any natural creature seeing the divine essence.
We make a distinction here: "seeing" == knowing.
What the intellect does in knowing something is likened to what the eye does in
seeing something. It apprehends something else-- vision makes know the word,
intellect makes known God.

There ins no unintelligibility in God himself since He is infinite, but since
creatures are finite, they have a limited understanding of God insofar as they
can only understand what their finitude limits them to.

Sight analogy here again-- God 'blinds' those that look at Him



#### Distinction of states 
The sates here mean living on earth and living in heaven 
- corporeal vs incorporeal 

"Are you you in this state and the next?" and "Is God God in this state and the
next?"

So, even though our vision will not be the same, and our ability to understand
will not be the same, it is a fuller or more intimate understanding of the
understander and that which is understood.

He will still not be fully comprehended in either state; that is, God still
cannot be know as what he is and how he is IN THIS LIFE. But it will be a
*fuller* comprehension in the next life.

> This whole discussion matters because an objection to God's existence is not
> being able to know him?
> Muslim objection -- Jesus in a body but not God. But he Is god. Since we can
> only understand things in this corporeal life inasmuch as they are corporeal,
> so did God take on a corporeal body for man to have something to understand.

#### exceptions to this
There are exceptions to this

Moses, Paul, and Jesus

Moses experiences God when he speaks to him

Paul experiences the beatific vision  when he is taken to heaven
(rapture-esque?)

Our Lord, for example, from the instance of his conception contains the beatific
vision

### Knowledge of God in this life
#### by natural reason
The light of natural reason is a share of the divine light

> You don't see the sun, but you see by means of the sun
> Certain things can be grasped truly by not understanding what reveals them

Thomas says there is a tremendous amount of knowledge afforded to man on the
basis on his natural capacity. IE just because we cannot know God's essence does
not mean we cannot know God.

Objection -- since we know things by their relationship in the physical world,
and God is not physical, we cannot know God
- Well, we already said we cannot know God in the fullness of his essence, but
even so, we cannot only know things by sense. We can move beyond sense, and are
not tied to only those sensible things.

The point of q 12 a 12-- knowledge of the First Cause "God" can be found by
natural reason. It is not grasping "what" God is, but "whether" God is.

#### by grace
TLDR: Yes, God can still reveal more than what we can know naturally. 

We also know things of God by divine revelation, such as God being a trinity of
persons. 

> He's being deliberately vague lmao

Knowledge by grace is basically a "more complete version" of human knowing. 
But we still don't know "what" God is.

"ingredients" of knowing
- images/species → what is received
- light → manner of reception; 
    - This gives us the abrasions, which is the
     knowledge
    - additional light(s) will be added for more complete knowing


### Additional considerations from I-II q 109

#### God's role in human knowing
TLDR: grace and God cannot be equated

The goodness of the natural ought not be equated with the goodness of the
supernatual.

A thing ingredient for the action of knowing:
- movement
    - namely, moving from potency to act
IN regard to man knowing, he is moving from potency to act, so it is a
    resounding yes that GOd can know without Grace 
Grace of help/actual grace

#### Additional "lights"
Light of faith
- Faith is a kind of knowledge, a kind of light, but experientially it is more
of a kind of darkness. It is knowledge only inasmuch as the intellect is
determined by it from the knowable object.
- What you assent to in faith is more unknown than known
- the light of faith does not illuminate what you assent to by faith, but rather
makes clear that you should adhere to it

Light of Prophecy















