---
id: rft/2024-10-04
aliases: []
tags: []
---

# 2024-10-04

### Outline
contextualizing ST II-II, qq 2-4
What Thomas is(nt) up to
The internal act of believing
- Definition and distinction
- 3-fold relation to object
An authentically human act
- natural human believing
- a personal example...
theological believing and role of virtues
the outward act of confessing

Catechism's senses of faith, ref. first or second class

JH Newman -- nature of assent

Ecc. 11:5; if we want to take seriously human life, we ought to have a proper
understanding of the order of generation (and such)

"Embryological account of faith"

#### The internal act of believing
"Cogitare cum assentione" -- too vague?
"thinking" is too vague for sure
"reasoning"? appears merely natural
"deliberating" This is better? but oxymoronic?
"seeking"/"inquiring" this is also better

intellectual acts
----------
Assent          knowing
and certainty   understanding

                believing

Searching       doubting
& uncertainty   suspecting
                opining -- closest to "human believing"

FINAL EXAM -- STRAP IN!
aspects of believing: (3 credere's) ( NOT DIFFERENT ACTS)
1. what -- believing things about God -- credere Deum
    - material object; things believed
2. who  -- believing God -- credere Deo
    - formal aspect of object; person believed
3. why  -- believing unto God -- credere in Deum
    - final aspect of object; whom beloved

EXAMPLE -- loving assent in a dating relationship leading to marriage

#### believing in general
a human act by which one gives intellectual assent to propositions not evident
or compelling in themselves (but communicated by one in a position to know), as
prompted by the will out of trust, for the sake of acquiring some good.


#### External act proper to faith?
Outward act of confessing


















