---
id: rft/2024-09-24
aliases: []
tags: []
---

# 2024-09-24

### Outline
Aquinas on Prophecy (continued)
- ingredient and execution
- relation to beatific vision
    - prophecy in blessed?
    - "rapture" of Paul (and Moses)
    - incompatibility of Christ
- increase and unfolding over time
    - Moses as gold standard of a prophet 
    - differentiation of prophecy
        - re: faith in mystery of God
        - re: mystery of incarnation
        - re: action?


### Aquinas on Prophecy (continued)
#### ingredient and execution
> If prophecy was a hot dog, what ingredients would it have?

Thomas wants to identify the underlying structure of human knowing before he
talks about the knowing of a prophet.

Human knowing involves light and species (naturally smh)
Prophetic knowing involves light and species, received supernaturally

> Meme with dog and hotdog in its mouth -- What you got there buddy? you got
> yourself a prophecy?

Intelligible species of prophecy -- infused knowledge 
- this happens in dreams or trance-like visions
- there is some degree of removal from the senses 

Three degrees of species:
> Not degrees, but components?
- external sensible
- imaginative
- internal Intelligible

And "light" is...? 
> the means by which interpretation occurs ?
> Light == the means bu which we see?
given to judge things:
- above reason
- lower, naturally knowable things
- direct human action

The end of prophecy is the "manifestation of truth that surpasses the faculties
of man"

The thing perceived is the species and the light as the knowledge by which is
understood

> What on earth 

> Are those who have further revelation further prophets?

Prophets fall under the divine revelation?

#### relation to beatific vision
Prophetic vision vs beatific vision
- Prophetic vision is relative to beatific vision; it is the same light
- for the blessed it is given forever
- for the prophet it is given forever
- This does not mean that either know everything, even for a moment

Beatific vision vs faith
- Our faith rests on the revelation to the prophets and the apostles, which is
    ultimately for us a trust in God

"rapture" of Paul (and Moses)
- we can track the continuities (?)
- raptus == seizing; we get English "rape"
    - nothing to do with "The Rapture"
- For man, it is natural that the mode of coming to know is through the
sensible, so the Lord infusing knowledge ought to use the senses or the body
- This gift given to these two isn't for their benefit but the benefit of
others, as their role as teachers for the gentiles and Jews

In-comparability of Christ (?)
- Christ is the one who gives these things to men to bring the saving knowledge
of God
- There is something radically unique about the Lord that we cannot compare him
to the other prophets


#### increase and unfolding over time
Moses as gold standard of a prophet (174.a4)
- Very qualified 
- he is only talking about OT prophets

Differentiation of prophecy (174.a6)
- re: faith in mystery of God
- re: mystery of incarnation
- re: direction of human action









