---
id: liturgy/25
aliases: 
tags:
  - history/liturgy
  - vaticanii
  - 2024-11-21
---
# Implementation of Vatican II

## 2024-11-21

>[!nota bene] 
>Study guide will be made available before thanksgiving break

### Outline
- Concilium
- St. Paul VI
- Texts: Missals and Lectionary

### Pope Paul VI and the *Consilium*
Following the promulgation of SC in 1963, Pope Paul VI established the *Consilium* in the apostolic letter *Sacram Liturgiam* (2 Jan. 1964)
> [!quote] SC 25

***Consilium*** Council for the implementation of the Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy
- 50 cardinals and bishops and 200 scholars/experts worldwide
- Tasks:
	1. Revise liturgical books according to SC
	2. provide instructions to educate and implement the renewal
	3. bring about the reform
- was integrated into the new Congregation for Divine Worship in 1969

#### National Conferences and Interim Missals
National conferences of bishops throughout the world, in dialogue with the Holy See, issued new interim Missals
- Some countries abused this initial phase by implementing what was not permitted by or not done in concert with Rome
	> [!example] Extemporaneous Anaphoras
- In the US this interim period was "comparatively moderate and done with Rome" ok boomer

#### Interim Missal of 1964
Initial experimental version of the Missal from the National Conferences of Catholic Bishops (now the USCCB)
- Bishop's Commission on the Liturgical Apostolate

First implementation in the US
- Everything the priest did was in Latin, but what the people did was in English
- The Pater was said by all, not just the priest
- Prayers of the Faithful were included
- The last Gospel was suppressed
- The communion formula and response of Amen was introduced
	> [!quote] Augustine Sermon 272

#### Instructions of the *Consilium*
From 1965 to 1970, the *Consilium* issued three instructions
- Approved by Pope Paul VI *in forma specifica*,
	> [!dict] *Forma Specifica*
	> Pope expressly adopts a decree and issues it in his own name with his full apostolic authority

*Inter Oecumenici* (1964) -- norms and principles for the implementation of SC. Order of the Mass, arrangements in the Church, freestanding altar

*Tres Abhinc Annos* (1967) -- Further clarified principles, wider use of the vernacular, warning about authority resting with the Church and not individual priests

*Liturgicae Instaurationes* (1970) -- Further clarifications, restrictions, and norms

#### Specific Interventions and Teachings of Paul VI
During the process of the implementation pf Vatican II and the work of the *Consilium*, Paul VI intervened a number of times
- Eucharistic prayers -- no change sin the Roman Canon and the composition of two or three additional anaphoras
- *Mysterium Fidei* -- as an acclamation
- Offertory is to be given more prominence
- Clarification of theological and sacrificial language
- Calls for prudence and warnings to Episcopal conferences, e.g., regarding extemporaneous anaphoras

Catechesis on 26 Nov. 1969 (immediately before change)
- Obedience to the charism of the liturgical act, to the call of the Holy Spirit, to a renewal of prayer
- Reason for the vernacular and the great sacrifice of the Latin
- Continued use of Latin in the people's responses

> [!quote]+ *Changes In Mass for Greater Apostolate*, 8-12
> > https://www.ewtn.com/catholicism/library/changes-in-mass-for-greater-apostolate-8969 
> 
> 8. It is here that the greatest newness is going to be noticed, the newness of language. No longer Latin, but the spoken language will be the principal language of the Mass. The introduction of the vernacular will certainly be a great sacrifice for those who know the beauty, the power and the expressive sacrality of Latin. We are parting with the speech of the Christian centuries; we are becoming like profane intruders in the literary preserve of sacred utterance. We will lose a great part of that stupendous and incomparable artistic and spiritual thing, the Gregorian chant.
> 
> 9. We have reason indeed for regret, reason almost for bewilderment. What can we put in the place of that language of the angels? We are giving up something of priceless worth. But why? What is more precious than these loftiest of our Church's values?
> 
> 10. The answer will seem banal, prosaic. Yet it is a good answer, because it is human, because it is apostolic.
> 
> 11. Understanding of prayer is worth more than the silken garments in which it is royally dressed. Participation by the people is worth more—particularly participation by modern people, so fond of plain language which is easily understood and converted into everyday speech.
> 
> 12. If the divine Latin language kept us apart from the children, from youth, from the world of labor and of affairs, if it were a dark screen, not a clear window, would it be right for us fishers of souls to maintain it as the exclusive language of prayer and religious intercourse? What did St. Paul have to say about that? Read chapter 14 of the first letter to the Corinthians: "In Church I would rather speak five words with my mind, in order to instruct others, than ten thousand words in a tongue" (I Corinthians 14:19).

### The Roman Missal
#### Editions of the Roman Missal
On 6 Nov. 1969, Paul VI gave the new *Ordo Missae* his written aprobation

1970 Missal -- current order of the Mass
- 1973: Approved English translation with the principle of "dynamic equivalency"
	> [!dict] Dynamic Equivalency
	> Translates basic thoughts and ideas in the series of words more than specific words

1975 Missal -- Additional prayers, modifications of additional prayers and rubrics
- 1985: approved English translation

2002 Missal -- Updated GIRM and minor editions, approved by JPII
- Instruction: *Liturgiam Authenticam* (2001)
- 2011: Approved English translation which used the principles laid out in *Liturgiam Authenticam* regarding formal equivalency
	> [!note]
	> Clearer biblical and patristic references, more precise theological and sacrificial language, and heightened poetic beauty (especially in the collects)

### Lectionary
Expansion of the Lectionary (SC 51)
- Three-year cyle for Sundays and two-year cycle for weekdays
- First published 1970 to 1972

Scripture is essential to the liturgy
> [!quote] Dei Verbum 21
> The Church has always venerated the divine Scriptures just as she venerates the body of the Lord, since, especially in the sacred liturgy, she unceasingly receives and offers to the faithful the bread of life from the table both of God's word and of Christ's body.
- Before: 1% of the OT; 22% of the Gospels; 11% of the NT
- After: 14% of the OT; 89.8% of the Gospels; 54.9% of the NT

Criticisms
- Too limited in representation of the OT
- Cutting of certain difficult passages

This had a great ecumenical impact, as it became the basis for many Protestant lectionaries worldwide.