---
id: patrology/2024-09-23
aliases: []
tags: []
---

# 2024-09-23

## The Imperial Church

### Christianity under Constantine

#### A Favored Religion
Laws tilt towards Christians
- does not mean Christianity becomes the official cult
- not that they are a majority
- they just have a little more optimism about their future
- feel of roman law changes
- still applies to everyone though
- crackdown on gladiatorial games to make them safer (?)
    - ex. no more crucifixions at the gladiatorial games
- changes to marriage
    - harder to divorce
    - concubines have fewer rights

Constantine's sympathies clear enough
- began to undermine state cultic observances
- supported building St. John Lateran 
- St. Peter's on the Vatican hill
- Decision to build a new imperial capital in the Greek East (Constantinople)
    - Designed as an "anti-Rome" in terms of its statues and buildings

#### Continued ambiguity?
Question of Constantine's death
- delayed baptism? 

### Arian Controversy
#### Origins
Arius, Alexandria presbyter
- "a charming, well educated man", aecetic life, with talent for dialectic

Main idea:
- The Son of God was created from non-being; there was a time where the Son was
not, and the Son was capable of good and evil
- wanted to defend the salvific sacrifice on the Cross, so he had to be able to
choose between the good of salvation and evil of not doing it (?)

#### Nicaea, 325
Pulled together by Constantine between
- Pro_Arius Palestinians
- Anti-Arius Egyptians
- 318 bishops? lol k

Issues:
- What's up with Jesus?
- How do we pick the date of Easter
- How do we properly exile a bishop


#### Watershed for Church
First Ecumenical Council

First promulgation of a Creed


### Accomodation after Nicaea

Tempers flare under Constantine
- Arians criticize Alexandrians
- Athanasius exiled 

342, Synod of Serdica (Bulgaria, Somewhere)

Constantine II and the search for language
XXX what the heck are all of these things?
- Homoousias (of the same substance) F&S same
- anomoios  (not the same substance) F&S essentially unlike
- homoiousias (of similar substance) F&S kinda similar

#### Julian the Apostate (361-363)
Cousin of the Sons of Constantine

Military Career in Gaul

Loved ancient philosophy and Religion

Died in Persia

Didn't like Christianity, so he stopped being one




















