--
id: patrology/2024-09-12
aliases: []
tags: []
---
# 2024-09-12

### Western Christianity
#### Greek Heritage
Many early christens spoke and wrote Greek

Hippolytus
- exegetical ideas are typically greek but also influenced by Roman disposition

#### Latin Heritage
> Latin is able to describe three thing well: fighting, law, farming

[[topics/tertullian|Tertullian]]
- literature marked by a lively and pugnacious nature
- makes several important decisions when talking about Christianity
    - coins the term *trinitas* 
    - applies the term *persona* to God
> What has Athens to do with Jerusalem?

[[cyprian-of-carthage|Cyprian of Carthage]]
- bishop
- extra ecclesiam nulla sullus

> Peganus, -i
> West Virginia country bumpkin

### Theological Controversies
#### Christological/Trinitarian Questions
Dynamist Monarchism
- AKA Adoptionism
- Some form of Jesus is a dude, and God is an honorific. 
- SINNNNNN! Noooooo!

Modalist Monarchism
- AKA Partripassianism
- "modes" of seeing the one God
- SINNNNNN! Noooooo!

#### Return of Dualism
- Manicheanism
- SINNNNNN! Noooooo!

### Liturgy and Church Life
Easter and the Catechumenate
- Easter became the focus of Christian initiation
- earliest controversies are about the date

Baptism and the Eucharist

Asceticism
- analogous to athletic excellence
- forming oneself into virtuous perfection
- acquiring of the things that bring excellence

Saeculum
- "looking towards heaven"
- distinguishing of prayer and differing types, stages, and forms
- Psalms emerge as popular way to prayer
- fasting becomes popular, incorporated into the liturgy
































