---
id: rft/2024-09-10/post
aliases: []
tags: []
---
SYST 501
Reading questions for 9/10
Readings: Aquinas, ST I, q.1, a.8; Feingold, ch. 6
 
1. In today’s assignment from the Summa theologiae, Thomas treats the role of
   “arguments from authority” in theology, and he identifies three different
sorts of authorities (auctoritates) or authoritative claims made by human
authors (auctores), which he arranges hierarchically, from least to greatest
importance. What are the three different sorts of “authority” or authoritative
claims that Thomas mentions? How does he identify their use and distinguish them
according to their relation to sacred doctrine (i.e., extrinsic vs. proper,
probable vs. demonstrative/probative)?

The three authorities that Thomas mentions are church doctors, natural reason,
and Divine Revelation. The church doctors are extrinsic to argument of sacred
doctrine because they make use of the other two. Natural reason and Divine
Revelation are proper to sacred doctrine for doctrine concerns the content of
Revelation and its human impact. Likewise, the doctors are also the probative
authorities because they must make arguments towards the use of these other
authorities, while Revelation and natural reason are  more probable due to the
nature of the science of doctrine.





2. According to Feingold, why are arguments from authority especially important
   in theology? In what ways—and/or to what ends—might theology rightly use
other arguments that are not from authority but are instead from reason?

Arguments from authority are especially important due to them having the
possibility of being the strongest arguments with the utmost certainly,
providing that the authority is that of God. This is the case in Divine
Revelation, from both Sacred Scripture and Sacred Tradition. Other arguments can
be used to provide a system of relation of how the primary truth that comes from
an authority relates to other truths. These can be known from reason and its
systems, such as logic. The theologian must make use of these arguments not to
diminish the faith but "to make clear other things that are put forward" (ST I,
q.1, a. 8, ad 2).














