---
id: rft/2024-09-06
aliases: []
tags: []
---

### Outline
Sacred Doctrine and theology
- need for divine theology
- distinguishing SD and theology
- theology as "science"
    - How as science?
    - unity and formality
    - purpose and nobility
- and, theology as "wisdom"

> From ST 1, q1

#### Example breakdown of Q1:
Why -- purpose and necessity of Sacred Doctrine
What -- specific purpose and sapiential character
How -- various modes in which it is given, received, studied, explained

|article|subject|question|
|---|---|---|
|1|why needed|why|
|2-5|science|what|
|6|wisdom|what|
|7|science|what|
|8|argumentative mode of theology|how|
|9-10|communication modes in scripture|how|

### Sacred Doctrine and theology
#### need for divine teaching
Divine teaching is necessary
but "seek not the things too high for you" (Sir. 3:22)
> Scripture is useful for teaching ([[2 Tim 3#16]]), so now we have divine teaching

> Why does God reveal things? Because they are beyond man's grasp.

If man is going to act towards an end, he needs to know that end. To this, if
man's end is supernatural, he needs divine revelation to know about it.

We are not simply discoursing theology on the basis of what nature can grasp but
rather on the basis of what God reveals


#### distinguishing SD and theology

Confusion: blending of doctrine and theology 

Sacred Doctrine, Sacred Scripture, and Sacred Theology are three distinct
things, conceptually and in reality

But he does seem to use them coterminously, for instance in article 3

The science of Sacred Doctrine is closely related to the science of Sacred Theology

Two points of distinguishing:
1. Thomas is most committed to God being the primary teacher
    - Obviously it is not only God involved in this; there is a human element as
    receiver and writer [[operative-principles#3-instrumental-mediation|OP 3]]
2. We engage Sacred doctrine through a lens of Sacred Scripture which we endage
   through scripture
   Theology apply itself through study of scripture? XXX

#### theology as "science"
- How as science?
> science == knowledge (can mentally retranslate, though he means it in a
> technical Aristotelian way)
So yes, theology is a science
- that is, it is a form of knowledge according to principles
    - principal *scientia*: holds principles immediately
    - subaltern or subordinate *scientia*: true science, but receives principles immediately

> What god reveals flows from what God knows

- unity and formality
> articles 3 and 7
Sacred Theology is one discipline working with all things that are revealed

> Theology is reasoned study about God and things in relation to God on the
> basis of Divine Revelation.
> 
> studies God and things related to God, but only in the ways in which they are
> related to God. EX not texts themselves, but the truths that the texts
> communicate

- purpose and nobility
Purpose: speculative and practical matters, but more speculative than practical
because God is sought for his own sake rather than for one's own sake



#### and, theology as "wisdom"





























