# Reflection on the term "Liturgy"

I recall being taught in a CCD class once something like "Christ's passion,
death, and resurrection all happen at the mass, and we are actually there
present with him." This was confusing at the time, of course understanding that
the mass might be a re-presentation of Christ's sacrifice, but 1085 seems to be
the reference point for what this catechist was trying to convey. I think he was
trying to make the connection between "the same offering" which is Christ on
Calvary and Christ in the Eucharist. This line of thinking tends to lead towards
a "participation" mentality, of course where the whole of the Christian people
are called to participate at least interiorly in the liturgy. But it might go
deeper than that, to say that 'your presence here at this mass is, as much as
you can make it, a presence at the perennial and transcendent moment of the
passion'




CCC 1085: "During his earthly life Jesus announced his Paschal mystery by his
teaching and anticipated it by his actions. When his Hour comes, he lives out
the unique event of history which does not pass away: Jesus dies, is buried,
rises from the dead, and is seated at the right hand of the Father "once for
all." His Paschal mystery is a real event that occurred in our history, but it
is unique: all other historical events happen once, and then they pass away,
swallowed up in the past. the Paschal mystery of Christ, by contrast, cannot
remain only in the past, because by his death he destroyed death, and all that
Christ is - all that he did and suffered for all men - participates in the
divine eternity, and so transcends all times while being made present in them
all. the event of the Cross and Resurrection abides and draws everything toward
life."
