---
id: rft/2024-09-13
aliases: []
tags: []
---

# 2024-09-13

### Sacred Doctrine and Scripture
#### Background not aa. 9-10
##### [[topics/dionysius|Dionysus]]
- somethings Pseudo
- Late 5th to early 6th
- Greek or Syrian monk
- *on the celestial hierarchy*
    - one of only 5 texts that remain
    - focus on divine revelation as written in scripture
    - key claim: the revelatory ray of divine light can enlighten man only by
     being upliftingly concealed within veils of sensible figures
        - How are thongs, like the sacraments, and our understanding of them
        uplifting for our understanding of Gods design and love?
        - God raises us up via images that point beyond themselves.

##### [[topics/augustine|Augustine]] 
- Late 4th to early 5th
- bishop
- convert
- *On Christian Doctrine*
    - part of a frickan massive corpus
    - focuses on how scripture should be received, studied, explained, and
    taught
    - words as signs of things and ideas
    - pride
        - if a teacher simplifies things... pride?
        - overcome man's pride by being humbled

#### Scripture's use of figures (metaphor)
##### Necessity for all
- befitting to this life
- natural dependence upon sense knowledge 
- preserving from error
    - higher (naturally knowable) things were taken as divine things

##### Utility for some
- For the simpletons (Hey! That's me!)
- For the thoughtful/sharper 
- for the impious 
    - If they are not capable of receiving the mysteries, they will be repelled
    by it

#### Extension to "Senses"
What a lot of what Thomas is doing in a 10 is extending his teaching from a 9 to 
being the literal sense of scripture.

Literal sense-- Belongs to the conventional way in which words are used to convey thoughts and
ideas.
Many things are classified under the literal sense
- metaphor/figurative expression
- history/narrative
- etiology/backstory
- analogy/comparison
- parabolic/parables (points to metaphor)

Spiritual sense-- things signified by words, which then signify other things.
Indicates we still use the text if Scripture when we do this.
- allegorical
- moral/tropological
- anagogical
necessity and utility?




























