---
cssclasses:
  - miravale
tags:
  - teleology
  - morality
  - human-nature
---
# 2024-08-27
ref: C.S. Lewis, from *Miracles*

## Teleology and Morality

#### I. Morality, purpose and a designer
1. Unless something has been given a purpose by someone, there is nothing
   it's supposed to be and nothing it's supposed to do
    1. example of daughter painting
    2. example of cutting wood and byproduct of sawdust
2. The idea of morality and all moral discourse regards what human persons
   are supposed to be and what human persons are supposed to do.
    1. unless people have been made by someone and for a purpose, the
       language surrounding morality is not cogent.

#### II. Can't we give ourselves purpose as a foundation for morality?
1. Culturally? -- doesn't every culture have its own standard of morality? 
    1. every culture has the same building blocks for morality; the same
       foundational principles
        1. eg. Eye exam: everyone is going to get the top line, most people
           will get the second line
        2. every culture has "Do good, avoid evil" and then "indiscriminate X
           = bad"
           1. This suggests that people are really bad at looking at the
              details of something objective 
2. Individually? -- can't we give ourselves purpose as a basis for morality?
"Today, Authenticity is largely decided by picking out what you want then
doing it"
    1. We don't recognize all goals as moral
        1. Hitler, Ted Bundy

> You can't give yourself ultimate purpose, because you did not make
> yourself

> "CPS can't take the kids away when  you give them something organic"

#### III. Is morality God based or human-nature based?
> "Are we doing this because God said so, or because this is how we are designed?"
> - Ockham, kinda

> -- Both and -- 

1. Morality is based on Human Nature, as designed by God
    1. God's design for the human person (Eternal Law)
    2. Our more/less hazy undertanding of that design is the Natural Law
    3. God's supernatural clarification of his design through Revelation is the
        Divine Law
    4. But all of it is insight into the human design

> - The protestant presentation of morality is killing us in the public sphere
> because they say it comes from God, which we agree with
> - Then they say apart from the bible you can't know right and wrong, which we
> radically disagree with

Morality is not fundamentally about what Revelation says, but about how Man was
made


> "Is morality based on the human person? Absolutely and in every way."

2. What if God commanded you to do something evil?
    1. moral good = fulfilling our purpose
    2. moral evil = failing to fulfill our purpose
    3. It is not possible to give something the purpose of failing to fulfill its
       purpose (barbers paradox?) This is a logical contradiction
       - "Double Predestination" is the same way

> 1. Don't kill innocent people
> 2. God says to Abraham "Kill your kid"
>
> - Bad/non-traditional response: Abraham didn't understand what God was asking
> - Keirkregar: The act of faith is such that you hold contradictory ideas in your
head at once; IE supreme model of faith. Embracing the contradiction.
> - Aquinas: lawnmower analogy. Thomas asked to borrow the lawnmover, I say
sure, but just leave your garage open and Ill get it back when I need it.
Then I ask Colby to get it from Thomas' garage because I authorized him to do it
it is not theft, But if Colby does it on his own it is theft. IE Life is on
loan to use and it is a temporary arrangement. So if God authorizes someone to
take a life, it is not murder
> - This does not justify religious killing, but only the killing that is
authorized by God
> - This life is not yours, its a lawnmower that belongs to someone else
> - You don't get to get mad when its your time to go


3. What does it mean to say "God is morally Good"?
    1. If morality is tied to purpose, then God would gave to have been designed
       to have a purpose by someone else
    2. When we say "God is Good", we don't mean that he fulfills a purpose as
       we do, but that His character is expressed when the things he makes
        fulfills their purposes
        1. In other words, God is the source of the purpose which is the source of
        our goodness

> define cenote

You cannot attain a perfection not aligned with purpose, but you can
pursue it (sin)

> "Humility is the subspecies of temperance that prevents(?) you from pursuing an
> excellence you have no business pursuing. "

#### Can you be good without God?
1. Someone can do morally good things for moral purposes without believing in
   God
2. But someone cannot do morally good things for moral reason without moral
   insights that depend on God
    1. People cannot make sense of their moral convictions without God
    2. Such a person cannot make sense of the insights by which they are morally
       good.

> Can a baby survive without a parent? No. Can a baby survive without
> acknowledging their dependence on a parent? Yes.

[[School/classes/24-25/f24/morals/2024-08-30|2024-08-30]]




















