---
id: morals/2024-09-20
aliases: 
tags:
  - freedom
  - classes/morals
  - morality
cssclasses:
  - miravale
---

# 2024-09-20

## The Will and Freedom (Aquinas)

#### I. Will -- Rational Appetite
1. Always pursues something under the aspect of good
    1. Not necessarily moral good, but ontological 
2. Every time any person does anything, it is for the sake of some perceived
   good
   > Cannot act for the sake of an evil, because evil is a privation. It has
   > no being.
   > Literally everybody is in hell because of pursuing a perceived good
3. Freedom and the multiformity of the Good
    1. Voluntary -- that which is knowingly self-moved
    > How can something be self-moved if it is moved by the good that it
    chooses?
    2. Is the will moved of necessity by its object?
        1. Insofar as everything in our experience is perceived as partially
           good and partially not good, we are free to choose among them.
        2. If something is presented which we perceive as unqualifiedly good, we
           we can not fail to will it
            > We do not have an option to choose for or against God if He does
            > not hide Himself?
            > He has to allow us to mischaracterize him, or we will not be free
            > Story about roses, pen pals, and an ugly woman

#### II. Limits to the Voluntary
1. Ignorance -- not knowing 
2. Physical compulsion/coercion -- not self-moved
3. Fear -- weakness 
    1. Opposed to the evil, but cannot resist -- lacking strength or courage to
       do so.
4. Concupiscence/desire -- ?
    1. Consequent concupiscence -- results from a decision and does not diminish
       its voluntariness (desire that comes after an action)
        1. If your desires and decisions are in line, you cannot assert that
           your desires are interfering with your decisions
    2. Antecedent concupiscence -- precedes a decision, and if it goes against
       that decision, it is interfering with it (desire that comes before an
       action)
       1. And so can reduce voluntariness (and culpability)

#### III. Voluntariness and Responsibility 
1. Freedom is coextensive with the praiseworthy and blameworthy 
> We don't get praised or blamed for things we do not do -- this implies that
> there are things which 
2. If you want to celebrate freedom, you must acknowledge responsibility

#### IV. Voluntariness as Pertaining to Means, not Ends
1. The human end is necessarily determined -- and so is not a object of freedom 
> Cannot choose own end; forge own path; gEt DiGy wiTH tHE uNiVerSE
2. When ends are forgotten, a disproportionate emphasis is placed on freedom
> What is everything for-- FREEDOM FREEDOM FREEDOM FREEDOM FREEDOM
> This is essentially how discussions of things play out in political discourse. 
> 
> Nothing is ultimately about freedom, because freedom pertains to ultimate
> ends













