---
id: "2024-09-10"
aliases: []
tags: []
cssclasses:
  - miravale
---

# 2024-09-10
## Patristic Morality

cf. Pinkears

> We don't look to the Fathers because they're old, we look at them because they
> are Saints.
> The Lord uses the image of a tree that grows, not a stream that flows
> Tradition is a tree that grows, not a stream that flows

#### I. Settings of Patristic Moral Teaching
> In what kinds of writings do we find the Father's moral teaching? -- pinkears
1. Scripture Commentary and homilies
    1. Main Source
2. Works dealing thematically with general moral principals 
    1. Four works in particular by St. Augustine
        1. *On the Christian Way of Life*
        2. *On Christian Doctrine* 
        3. *Commentary on the Sermon on the Mount*
        4. *Handbook/Enchiridion on Faith, Hope, and Charity*
3. Works dealing with particular ethical issues
    1. Veils
    2. Dancing
    3. Lying
    4. Usury 

> Matt 19  1 Cor 7 10-- can separate, but cannot remarry unless dead

#### II. Characteristics
> What are the key themes of Patristic teaching?
1. "Scriptured"
    1. They did not use Scripture to buttress their moral teaching; instead,
       their moral teaching flowed out of their reading of Scripture
       > they did not footnote hunt 
    2. Due to the tropological sense, all of scripture had moral importance

    > I know things in the inner world are like babies, CS Lewis, Commentary on
    > Psalms

    3. Pinckers calls the Fathers' reading of Scripture "real" because
        1. They held that Scripture accurately describes reality
        2. They are supposed to change how you live in the real world

        > 1 Sam -- Samuel himself grows old-- "He did not let a single word of
        > the Lord fall to the ground"

2. Drew upon Pagan culture
    1. (Neo)-Platonism
        > I just wake up and smell the forms
        1. Emphasis on Spiritual over Material -- soul over body
    2. Stoicism
        1. Emphasis on submission to the cosmic order through
           detachment/self-mastery
    3. Dangers -- Pagan thought would contaminate the Gospel
        1. A devaluing of the material, bodily world
        2. An asceticism that can do damage to human goodness

> Takeaway -- radicality is not the problem

3. Three Models of the Moral life -- Martyrs, Virgins, Monastics
    1. represent all the virtues of both Christian culture AND pagan culture
        1. Self-discipline
        2. Spiritual over material
        3. Faith, Hope, Charity


#### III. Two Further aspects of Monasticism 
1. The Christian moral life is a struggle against demons
    > Don't forget that the Gospel is framed as duel between God and Satan
    > How does Satan pay his workers? The wages of sin is death.
    > When Satan pays Jesus in death, he breaks the rules of the agreement, and
    > so Jesus rises
    > So the only card Satan has left to play is to make you afraid of death,
    > which the Resurrection sets us free from
    1. Which you win by overcoming the fear of death by union with Christ, who
       conquered death
    2. "You pick an earthly good, and I'll give it up" -- this is how they
       liberated the world
2. Spiritual Fatherhood
    1. Humility and obedience are indispensable 



