---
id: morals/2024-09-13
aliases: 
tags:
  - morals
  - happiness
  - augustine
  - love
  - grace
cssclasses:
  - miravale
---
# 2024-09-13

cf. Augustine
## Augustine

#### I. Happiness
1. This is the starting point for moral discussion.
    1. Everyone agrees with it
    > It is crazy hard to find moral common ground otherwise
    2. Keeps moral discussion concrete and practical 
2. Categorizing things according to happiness
    1. What gives happiness? -- only God
        1. What is to be **enjoyed** -- *quibus fruendum*
    2. What gives less than happiness? -- everything else
        1. What is to be **used** -- *quibus utendum*
        2. Something things are to be used with enjoyment
            1. If these things are not loved with God as the end in view, not
               only will it not be ultimately satisfying, but you'll be missing
               the purpose of these things in the first place.

> Belgium -- Lowering the euthanasia age and transgendering age: their
> compassion is, at the root, indistinguishable from the purest hate and torture 

#### II. Love
1. "Love and do what you will"
2. Different kinds of love
    1. Love of self, to the point of forgetfulness of God
        1. [[Resources/Bible/02 - DRA/01 - Genesis/Gn-03|Adam in the Garden]]
    2. Love of God, to the point of forgetfulness of self
        1. The joy of charity, love of God and neighbor, is tied to
           forgetfulness of self
            > You're depressed? Go serve somebody else

3. Augustine's definition of virtue → Ordered love
    1. The order of love -- Being more solicitous with whom circumstances put
       you in closer contact (De Doctrina)

#### III. Grace
1. In opposition to Pelagius, Augustine insists that everything good about us,
   without qualification, comes from God
    1. This includes all of our good actions and decisions.
        1. Even our decision to accept God's gifts is God's gift
        > There is no point in which we say "this good thing I did on my own",
        > because then you're an uncaused-cause. There is no initiative of being
        > that comes from oneself.

2. The moral life depends on a continual request for God's help
    1. The relentless asking 
        1. Makes us continually aware that everything depends on God
        2. Makes us better appreciate the gift when it is finally different
    2. This is why God delays -- so you will ask more
        > Pope Francis: "God does not get tired of forgiving. We get tired of
        > asking."

#### IV. Trinity and morality 
1. This **IS** the end of all morality-- union with the Trinity
2. Trinity is the Operative Norm of the Moral Life
    1. A situation where there is no division between **my good** and **your good**
        1. "Love your neighbor as yourself" -- get to a place where your
           neighbor's good is what makes you happy.
           > This is not quantitative its numerical-- Do not love your
           > neighbor with as much love as you love yourself, but rather love
           > him in the place of yourself.
    2. Distinction of person without division
        1. That's as happy as you get
3. Doctrine of the Trinity is the Doctrine of Happiness is the Doctrine of
   Morality
   > Leo 13: The state of grace only differs from the state of Saints by degree,
   > not by kind


























