---
id: morals/2024-09-17
aliases: []
tags: []
cssclasses: miravale
---

# 2024-09-17

> The good, why no created good is sufficient for beatitude, why God is,
enumerations of the goods required for perfect happiness 
> TLDR: [[thomas-aquinas|Aquinas on the Good]]

#### I. The Good
1. Ontological good → being insofar as it is fulfilling and can move the
   appetite
    > Being insofar as it is attractive to either one will or passions

    1. Insofar as agents knowingly attain a good, they experience delight
        1. When one attains a partial good, they experience partial delight
        2. Attaining a complete good entails complete delight, also called
           beatitude
           1. This is the goal of life.

2. Moral good → a decision that is conducive to beatitude
    1. For a choice to be what it is supposed to be,it must be conducive to this
       last end
       > Otherwise it does not fulfill its purpose, and is not conducive to
       > beatitude

#### II. Why Created Goods do not Entail Beatitude
1. Goods external to the human person
    1. Examples:
        1. Non-concrete/potential goods
            1. Money and power 
            > Only exist as a potential for something else
            2. Time and space 
            > If you wait until you have enough to be generous, you will never
            be generous
            > Efficiency is about prioritizing these
        2. Concrete/actual goods
            1. Land, houses, food, medicine
            > There is a threshold for possession in which one stops acquiring
            them

    2. Reasons why these cannot provide beatitude 
        1. Immoral people can have a lot of these goods -- but beatitude is the
           standard of morality 
        2. Unhappy people can have a lot of these goods -- but beatitude just
           means happiness
        3. These goods can contribute towards unhappiness 
        4. Possession of these goods is due primarily to chance. It is absurd to
           think that a thing would be designed to reach its end totally
           haphazardly or due to chance

        > potential goods → concrete goods → intrinsic goods → last end (God)

1. Intrinsic goods -- fulfilled states of the human person
    1. Goods go the body
        1. Clearly not enough for happiness 
    2. (created) goods of the soul
        1. The soul always wants more truth and goodness than it has
        > Is there any good you have gotten where you have not said 'what's
        next?'

> Potential and concrete goods are means, and potential goods are mere means.
> But intrinsic goods are ends in themselves. 
> One pursues potential goods for the sake of concrete goods, for which you
> select intrinsic goods that are optimal for pursing the last end.

#### III. God as Ultimate End
1. "God alone satisfies"
2. Everyone desires *perfect* and *permanent* happiness.
    1. These cannot be had in this life.
    2. Either life is absurd, or God exists (the perfect good) and can be
       reached in the next life

> cannot 'renounce' all goods in order to pursue the last end. One must pursue
the last end by judiciously and discriminatingly pursing all the goods.

#### IV. Articulating What Beatitude Looks Like
1. Aristotle: happiness → contemplation 
    1. Requires a number of prerequisites 
2. Aquinas: contemplation of God as He is in the beatific vision, then overflows
   into an ecstasy of of the body
3. Germaine Grisez: irreducible human goods that we all see
    1. Physical
    2. Intellectual
    3. Aesthetic 
    4. Achievement 
    5. Inner peace (therapist issues lmao)
    6. Relationships with human persons
    7. Relationships with more than human persons
    > These are the impulses that govern literally every decision of every day
    > of your life


















