---
id: wisdom/2024-09-12
aliases: []
tags: []
---

# 2024-09-12

### outline
Ps. 3-24
- consideration of Ps. 22
Ps. 25-41: God's covenant mercy
- initial observations
- forgiveness and redemption
    - new ideas, terms, "song"
    - exegetical strategy: word study
    David/psalmist as figure of...
- Psalm category: acrostic
Exursus: Psalms' ultimate horizon
- textual evidence thus far...
- apophatic blending of liturgical and eschatological 

### Ps. 3-24
#### - consideration of Ps. 22

### Ps. 25-41: God's covenant mercy


#### forgiveness and redemption
new ideas and terms 
The Psalmist starts sinning himself in Ps. 25
Previously, it has been something the wicked do or not admitting he has done it

1. Psalmist's sinfulness: 26, 32, 33, 34, 41, ...
2. mercy: 25, 40, 51, 69, 77, 79
3. redeem
    - "ransom" -- padah: 25, 26, 31, 34, 44, 49, 55, 69, 71, 78, 119, 130
    - "avenge" -- gael: 19, 69, 72, 74, 77, 78, 103, 106, 107, 119
4. "covenant" -- berit: 25, 44, 50, 55, 74, 78, 83, 89, 103, 105, 106, 111, 132
5. "new song" -- shir hadash: 33, 40, 96, 98, 144, 149
    - new song is that which those are invited to sing

#### exegetical strategy: word study
The... study of words

A consideration of how and where a given word or phrase is used, in order to
establish its range and depth of meaning. 

Key tools include a lexicon (dictionary) and concordance (index).

#### David/psalmist as figure of...
The very fact that you have a figure like this already indicates a certain
degree of plasticity when it comes to the psalmist's "I". This is, the Psalmist's
express his own words, his assembly, and all of the faithful, so that his "I"
can become theirs. We are invited as a reader of the psalm to consider ourselves
as more closely related to the author than simply reading; that is, we can put
ourselves there and extend certain things said about Christ to the members of
Christ

#### Psalm category: acrostic

### Exursus: Psalms' ultimate horizon
> monasticism -- a lived experience of the eschatological state

#### textual evidence thus far...

#### apophatic blending of liturgical and eschatological 

























