---
id: wisdom/2024-09-24
aliases: []
tags: []
---

# 2024-09-24

### Outline

Book 4 as "editorial heart"
- signs of editorial care
- larger vantage of psalter
exile, or posture
- B/P's "distinct themes"
- Ps. 95: "Today" and "rest"
Psalm Category: hymn/praise
among the nations, a "new song"
- why a turn to praise
- forgiveness and incorporation
- the victory of his holy arm



#### Book 4 as "editorial heart"
signs of editorial care
- thematic groupings
    - The Lord as a sock of refuge
        - 90-95
    - the Lord's kingship
        - 93-103
    - The deeds of old
        - 104-106
- a psalm-to-psalm flow, via keywords

> What is the relevance of this to my ministry as a priest?

Larger vantage of psalter
- we see a frame of thousands of years of time reflected upon, from creation to
the final judgment 

#### exile, or posture
B/P's "distinct themes" present in these psalms
1. The Lord's kingship
    - because no king?
2. The Lord as rock of refuge (dwelling place)
    - because no land?
3. The Lord's glory, seen in creation
    - Because no temple?
4. Praise of the Lord in song
    - Because no sacrifice/liturgy?

Are these just emphasized because of the exile? Why are they not praised
throughout the entire time? 
These are designed to present Israel with a Sacramental figure

So these do not just present exile as a state, but presents sojourners as a
state in life, where we are traveling to get to where we worship constantly

Ps. 95: "Today" and "rest"

#### Psalm Category: hymn/praise
cf. handout 


#### among the nations, a "new song"
Why a turn to praise?
forgiveness and incorporation
- A beg or corporate forgiveness 
- But not just asking for forgiveness of the whole, but asking for all people
to be incorporated into the Lord

the victory of his holy arm



















