---
id: wisdom/2024-09-17
aliases: []
tags: []
---

# 2024-09-17

### Outline
Ps 42-72: From Sinai to Zion

Transition to Book II (and III)
- initial observations
- Structural considerations
Royal/messianic considerations
Re-foregrounding of Zion
- Psalm Category: Zion
- exegetical strategy: narrative background
- covenantal movement
- liturgical reform
    - interior/exterior correspondence
    - preferred option for Todah
- Psalm Category: Todah/thanksgiving

### Transition to Book II (and III)
#### initial observations
Starting with 42, first psalms which not not said to be psalms of David

Book II
- Psalms of the sons of Korah (42-45)
- Psalm of Asaph (50)
- Psalms of David (51-72)
- Psalms of Asaph (73-83)
- Psalms of the sons of Korah (84-89)


#### Structural considerations

### Royal/messianic considerations
Some of these are 45, 72, and 89

45: *Epithelemium* -- Wedding song
- To the king? Physical, or the Lord?
- To the daughter? Physical, or Zion?

72: a blending of the line between God and the prince -- it is a messianic Psalm
which Christ is glorified in?
elsewhere in the psalter we see "do not put your trust in princes", but here the
psalmist puts his trust only in a prince. He uses language that is otherwise
only attributed to the Lord, that is, he saves the needy and lifts up the poor,
and the nations will call him blessed (someone who is not yet present?)

### Re-foregrounding of Zion
#### Psalm Category: Zion
Do not share a tone  but rather subject matter. Can be explicit. See handout.

#### Exegetical strategy:
#### Examination of Historical/Narrative Background
What is happening in the background? 
What historical background is pertinent? 
What are the circumstances surrounding the writing?

#### covenantal movement
movement of and the building of the covenant of Moses on Sinai to Zion with
David
The movement from Moses and David  is itself anticipating a movement from Moses
and David to the definitive Son of David

#### liturgical reform
firs reform: The linking of the Psalter to music is linked to David's liturgical
reform.
There is a correspondence between exterior and interior experiences during
worship. 
There are also Psalms talking about what an acceptable sacrifice is.

Second reform: a greater emphasis on the Todah sacrifice. 
Leviticus offerings (1-7)
1. Whole burnt offering
2. Cereal offering 
3. Peace offerings 
    1. Freewill offering
    2. Thank offering (Todah)
4. Sin offering
5. Guilt offering

####  Psalm Category: Todah/thanksgiving
See handout




















