---
id: wisdom/2024-10-31
aliases: []
tags: []
---

# Job
## 2024-10-31

### Outline
Introduction and overview
- Initial Observations
- Narrative Context
- Fit with wisdom literature 
- structure and contents
- How to approach

Consideration of text
- narrative framing (ch. 1-2)
    - initial setup
    - What befalls Job
- Opening soliloquy (ch. 3)
- 1st cycle of disputes (ch. 4-14)
    - shift of focus
    - What is being claimed?
- Closing soliloquy (27-31)
    - On providence and wisdom
    - on Job's past and present
    - on Job's own arrogance
- 3 cycles of disputes (4-26)
    - What is being claimed?
        - By friends?
        - By Job?

    - What is right? 


### Introduction and overview

#### Initial Observations
It is a book that may require the most wrestling?
- In some ways, it is the hardest text

#### Narrative Context
##### When?
Patriarchal period (early 2nd mil. BC); around time of Abraham

##### Where?
Uz, within the land of Edom (outside Israel, which is not around yet)

So, we are dealing with a non-Israelite who is still righteous

##### Who?
- Job (and Mrs. Job)
- Eliphaz the Taemznite
- Bilhad the Shuhite
- Zophar the Namathite
- Ehilu the Buzite

None of these know anything explicit about revelation

---
- The Lord
- Satan

Begin and enter the narrative


#### Fit with wisdom literature 
Job is the only wisdom book that focusses on things that do not relate to the
Israelite or Israel at all-- it is a sort of "thoroughly Gentile" text but it is
also aware of the Canon. 

There is also a degree of similarity to Ecclesiastes and the Song of Songs.

These can all be taken as big proverbs or riddles** but this is wrong?

The form of Parent and Child instruction is missing

> I too, like the Lord, am sarcastic with my children

Contrast between the righteous and the wicked, like at the beginning of the
Psalms 

Common themes of fear of the Lord and divine retribution


#### structure and contents
Distinction of Prose and Poetry

There is a prose prologue (ch. 1-2). Afterwards follows a lengthy set of poetic
disputations (3-42).

- prologue
- Opening soliloquy
- cycles of responses
- cycle 1: 1 4-14
- cycle 2: 15-21
- cycle 3: 22-26
- Job's concluding soliloquies (27-31)
- Ehilu: 32-37

So like Ecclesiastes, it is a poetic core with prose bookends. 

Bergsa/Pitre suggest that at least the first bit of prose makes sense because
without the context, the Opening soliloquy and following cycles of responses
make little sense

#### How to approach
There is not really a contemporary or traditional view of authorship or origin.
But it doesn't really matter.

Why does the book of Job exist?
Bergsa/Pitre -- Job is a theodicy -- grapples with the question of how a good
God permits evil.

Hahn -- Not so much God being called to account (like a theodicy) as it dispute
about God's providence and how and when man is to be repaid by God for his
actions
- This is a connection between righteous and temporal prosperity ^9f8678
- This is the main point of dispute between God/Satan, and Job/friends

"Those who are closest to God; will the suffer or not?" Is there a suffering
that befalls with being close to God?

### Consideration of text

#### narrative framing (ch. 1-2)
- initial setup
- What befalls Job

Job 2:7 links to Deut. 27

#### Opening soliloquy (ch. 3)
##### Threefold curse
1. cursing of his birth (3.1-10)
2. wishing for death (3.11-19)
3. lamenting the bitterness of life (3.20-26)

#### 1st cycle of disputes (ch. 4-14)
- shift of focus
- What is being claimed?


#### Closing soliloquy (27-31)

##### On providence and wisdom
Job makes some claims on these in ch. 27-8 which seems un-Job-like
or, Job mimics the style of his accusers? (withering sarcasm)

##### on Job's past and present

##### on Job's own arrogance


#### 3 cycles of disputes (4-26)
##### What is being claimed?
###### By friends?
> [!claim] "Job is sinful (very sinful)"
> False: Job is not sinful.

> [!claim] "God punishes the sinful in this life"
> - temporal affliction is necessarily due to sin
> Sometimes: Must specify the conditions.

> [!claim] "Job's words are impious"
> Depends:

> [!claim] "Temporal prosperity is necessarily due to righteousness"
> False

> [!claim] "Repentance will bring about restoration"
> Sometimes

> [!claim] "Job should repent from his sin"
> False: He has no sin to repent of

> [!claim] "Job is groaning against God"
> Truth:

###### By Job?

##### What is right? 


## 2024-11-07

### Outline
Consolidation of gains
- Recap of disputes
- Some specific texts

Elihu's speech (ch. 32-37)
- "inserted character"
- What is being claimed?
- is he right?

God's responses (38-42a)
- Content of speeches 
- purpose?

Epilogue (42b-c)
- Aftermath of dipsputes
- Fittingness of resolution
- Sheol and resurrection

### Consolidation of gains
#### Recap of disputes
Job wants to die
> SAME

I think we need to be able to invite Job as having a possibly pious disposition,
rather than just complaining 

The friends are wrong on many of their claims

Job has done nothing sinful

Job makes the accusation that God is unjust XXX

It is JOb's kindness by which he calls attention to his friend's errors; reading
it as self-serving or without humility is like wrong reading

JB-09 -- he exhorts his friends to repent


#### Some specific texts
27 and 28 are sometimes considered later additions

### Elihu's speech (ch. 32-37)
#### "inserted character"
Something is missing-- 

Elihu "stands in the place of the audience" -- gives voice to certain judgments
and frustrations the reader has by the time they get here

#### What is being claimed?
Elihu does not claim Job has hidden sins, but instead takes seriously the
affirmations of sinlessness in JOB
in a Qualified fashion he is right; but he increasingly misses the mark as he
goes on. They remain misconstruals 

Elihu never addresses the reasons for JObs sufferings, he just disses on JOb

Hahn does not think JOb is a theodicy


#### is he right?

### God's responses (38-42a)
#### Content of speeches 
#### purpose?
Why does God responds?
Hahn makes no smoking gun case.

God is belittling Job, but not to condemn but to underscore the greatness of the
Lord and to keep Job in his place




### Epilogue (42b-c)
#### Aftermath of disputes
God doubles everything except his children

#### Fittingness of resolution
#### Sheol and resurrection



















