---
id: wisdom/2024-09-19
aliases: []
tags: []
---

# 2024-09-19

### Outline
Continued:
    Psalm Category: Todah

Ps. 73-89: meditation deeds of old
    initial observations
    Present embitterment
        Communal laments
        Causes and threats?
    Exegetical Strategy: Rhetorical Analysis
    Parables form the past
        Renarration's meditation
        imagery and figurality
        underlying purpose/pedagogy
    Ps. 89: hope in darkness


### Continued:
Zion is the place of sacrifice in book 2 of the psalter 

#### Psalm Category: Todah
Praise psalms -- see handout
Todah offering -- nothing can last until morning; it must all be consumed 
inverted from lament psalms

### Ps. 73-89: meditation deeds of old
#### initial observations
First time there is reference to the 'devastation' of the Temple ('holy place')
> "I have certain bugaboos that I get hung up on"

Reflection on days of Old, especially Exodus 
Shorter than the previous books
Mostly non-Davidic Psalms (excepting 86)
Distinction between divine kingship and David kingship (Though combined in
Christ)
Saddest :(
Most negative in tone, especially in regard to the corporate fate/condition 

> We're screwed. This is as bad as it gets. \*Sips coffee\* Maybe.

Densest concentration of communal laments


#### Present embitterment
Communal laments
Causes and threats?
- Internal threat -- sin from inside Isreal itself
#### Exegetical Strategy: 
#### Rhetorical Analysis
Since rhetoric is the art of effective communication, Rhetorical Analysis
considers effective structures and strategies as well as their intended
functions.
- tone style speaker addressees, etc.


#### Parables form the past
If sin is the issue, it is always a problem and cannot be blamed on a single
person 

Renarration and meditation
- meditation seems to be a different thing than it was in psalm 1

imagery and figurality
#### Ps. 89: hope in darkness

TLDR: 
The deeds of old are keyed especially to hope in god; 
that he has both the power an desire to save but they are just as much connected
to honesty and sobriety

Of the two there is a greater emphasis on the power and desire to save

God is always faithful even in the face of God being seemingly distant and
leaving his people.












