---
id: wisdom/2024-09-05
aliases: []
tags:
  - psalms
  - bible
  - classes/wisdom
---

# 2024-09-05

### Outline
Ps. 1-2 as introduction to Psalter
- Psalm Categories
    - Wisdom/Torah
    - Royal/Messianic
- Complex writing of Ps. 1-2 
    - Distinction emphases
    - deeper complementarity
- Exegetical strategy: inclusio
- Ps. 1-2 as "pilot episode"


### Ps. 1-2 as introduction to Psalter
#### Psalm Categories
See Handout -- Categories or Genres of Psalms 

Wisdom/Torah

Royal/Messianic


deeper complementarity

#### Analysis of Psalms 1 and 2
##### **[[Ps 1]]** 
- [[Ps 1#1]]-2: characterization of "blessed man"
- [[Ps 1#3]]: description of blessedness
- [[Ps 1#4]]-5: contrastive depiction of the fate of the wicked
- [[Ps 1#6]]: Summary of the divergence of the "two ways"

##### **[[Ps 2]]** 
- [[Ps 2#1]]-3: The kings and nations plotting against the Lord and his
anointed; colluding with their speech 
- [[Ps 2#4]]-6: description of the Lord's reply; derisive
- [[Ps 2#7]]-9: shift to anointed son, who speaks the Lord's decree 
- [[Ps 2#10]]-12b: return fast to king, concluding with psalmist's XXX
- [[Ps 2#12]]: something something blessings

##### Some notes
- Neither of these two songs are prayers
- Precisely insofar as they are serving as an introduction, they are more
directed towards giving the reader a prayer orientation. 

- They accompany these prayers which teach us how to pray.

#### Exegetical strategy: inclusio
**inclusio**: Literary device that sets apart a text or section of text by framing or
bracketing with similar material

Forming a deeper theological unity between them

Eg. [[Mark 11]] -- travel narrative in and around Jerusalem. Fig tree without
fruit, Jesus curses it, then they come back and it had withered
- Within this frame, fruitfulness is expected of the Lord's holy city,
Jerusalem, and it isn't there, meaning Jerusalem will end up becoming desolate.


#### Ps. 1-2 as "pilot episode"












