---
tags:
  - linker-exclude
---
1. According to the CCC, why is human language limited with respect to speaking
   about God? Granting this limitation, what value does the CCC nonetheless
affirm of human language about God, such that it is suitable for interreligious
dialogue or for expressing and communicating the Catholic faith?

Human language is limited to speaking about God because God is beyond what we
can describe. By this I mean that even using a humanly perfect descriptor (Good,
Perfect, Simple, etc.) cannot fully capture what God is because God is
that-and-more; the perfection of goodness in God is beyond how we describe
Goodness. In a way this is like Anselm's ontological argument; God is more
perfect than the most perfect thing we can describe, once again, because we are
limited. Excepting this, language still suffices to communicate the Faith
because the Church holds that man has the capacity to know God by nature and by
reason. Even using limited human language, one may discuss God in a way which
captures the heart or mind of another.
 
2. In its initial discussion of divine revelation in paragraphs 50–73, the CCC
   reflects on how the deeds and events of salvation history, as recorded in the
words in Scripture, manifest God’s will and his “plan of loving goodness.” How
do the purpose clauses (“in order to,” “so that,” etc.) and/or statements of
intent (“wished,” “desired,” “willed,” etc.) in this section serve to express or
explain what God’s will or “plan” involves? In other words, when taken together,
how do these various assertions serve to fill in the picture of this “plan”? How
is this plan said to be accomplished by God’s fully revealing himself in the
sending of Christ, the incarnate Word?

God's plan for salvation is carried out piecemeal as the world becomes ready for
it. This is evident in progressive covenants, where every covenant or new law
posits a new expectation of the people for their journey back to God. Analogy--
painting a picture takes time, and it is done piece by piece. One begins with
the background, then paints the middleground, then the foreground, then adds
details. It seems to be similar with God where various covenants are made,
actions are carried out, and prophets proclaim to add on to the expectation of
holiness for salvation, ultimately culminating in Christ's sacrifice.
